Hello and welcome back
to the course on deep learning.
In today's tutorial, we will continue exploring
how self-organizing maps learn.
So, previously we stopped at this image.
We found out how the best-matching units or BMUs
are updated, and how everything around them is also updated
when they wind rows which they match up to.
And today we're going to have a look at
a bit of a more sophisticated example
where we have several best-matching units
for instance five, in this case.
So let's get started.
So as we discussed, these BMUs are going to be updated
to be even closer to the rows that they matched up to,
and then each one of these BMUs is going to be assigned
a area around it, and that area is going to be calculated
through a radius and this is what it looks like.
And by the way, here we can see that there's some values
that don't fall under the radius,
that usually doesn't happen in self-organizing maps
this is just our visual example.
Normally the radius at the start is selected as quite large
so it encompasses nearly the whole self-organizing map.
And the thing that happens here is, first of all
all of the nodes that fall into these areas
are updated, as we saw previously.
So let's go through these from the top to the bottom.
So, for example, for the purple node
there we go, all of those nodes are updated.
So first of all, the purple node itself
is updated to be closer to that row that it matched up to
as the BMU, and then all of those other nodes
that formed that radius are updated
so it drags them along with itself.
Then for the blue node, same thing happens
same thing happens for the green node
same thing happens for the red node
and same thing happens for the orange node.
So they are all dragged closer and closer
and there's a bit of a resistance
or push and pull between them because
for instance the blue node is dragging this row
this node that way, the orange node is dragging it that way
and the red node is dragging it that way
green node is dragging it that way.
It's a bit of a battle between them
but that's normal, that's what happens in the SOM
and that happens, for instance, in your...
So you go through all of your rows and your dataset
and all of these updates happen.
And then, as you have a new epoch
or so you go through your rows again
what happens is a unique feature
of the Kohonen Learning Algorithm is applied
and what that is is that your radiuses actually shrink.
So in your next situation, what happens is the radiuses
become a bit smaller, and this time
when you're going through your dataset, your BMUs
they're actually pulling, not on as many nodes in your SOMs
so this time only these nodes are pulled, these ones
and these ones, these ones, these ones.
And then, again, the radiuses shrink.
And this time these nodes are pulled, these nodes are pulled
these nodes are pulled, these nodes are pulled
and these nodes are pulled.
So the process becomes more and more accurate
as you go through your dataset again and again and again
and if at the start you were just trying to get
all of your SOMs very close to your data
and roughly on the surface of your data
as we can see in this example.
So at the start, you were just trying
to get anywhere near your data.
Then as you go through more and more and more iterations
what happens is, you are adjusting your SOM
in a more precise and a more laser-specific manner
you're adjusting, okay little edge over here
little bump over here, I need to...
This needs to adjust a little bit
this needs to adjust a little bit, so you're becoming
more and more specific and targeted in your approach.
And that's exactly how your SOM slowly but surely
goes over your data and becomes kind of like a mosque
for your data, as we can see in this example over here.
And so, in our visual representation
what that would look like is...
Here is our data, and then through lots and lots
of iterations, our SOM might look something like this
where there's some battle between the different nodes
and where different nodes should be assigned to
should they be green or blue or purple or orange or red?
And then, eventually we've come to settle it
to some kind of representation.
So hopefully that was useful and now
you have a good intuitive understanding
of how SOMs work and learn.
And now let's go through a couple of things
that are important to remember as takeaways
from this tutorial.
So, a couple of things that are important to know:
Number one, SOMs retain topology of your input set.
As we could see from the image
where the map is slowly becoming like a mosque of your data
your data might have some topology
there might be some interrelations in your data.
Well, the SOM does everything it possibly can to be
as close to your data as possible
and become like a mosque for your data
and therefore it will retain the topology of your input set
and that is very very important, very valuable for us
in terms of understanding our dataset better.
Next is that SOMs actually reveal correlations
that are not easily identified.
As you can imagine, if you have twenty or thirty or fifty
or a hundred or even hundreds of columns in your dataset
it can be very challenging to assess
any kind of correlations or similarities
that might be present in your dataset
whereas a SOM can neatly put it all--
analyze all that for you, and then put all of that for you
into a map, and you will be able to see those things
on the map very easily.
SOMs classify data without supervision
and this is an important aspect as we discussed.
We are now venturing into the space
of unsupervised deep learning, and as you can see SOMs
don't actually need any labels.
For instance, in convolutional neural networks
we discussed that we need to train our dataset
in order for it to recognize objects
it has to first be told that these are cats
and these are dogs, and then after lots and lots
of iterations, it'll know how to recognize a cat from a dog
whereas here we don't need any labels
we don't need any supervision, the SOM will, on its own
extract features, and very often it will extract features
or show us features, dependencies, and similarities
correlations which we aren't even expecting
and therefore we'll be very very surprised.
So that's a very important aspect of SOMs.
They can be used in scenarios where
you don't actually know what you're looking for
but you know that you want to find
any kind of correlations in your data.
SOMs don't require a target vector
that's the same thing as they don't need supervision
and as a result of that, there is no
process of backpropagation.
There is no backpropagation in the training of a SOM
as you remember in artificial neural networks
the data would go through the network, we'd get a result
we'd compare it to the target vector, we'd find the error
and then we'd backpropagate that error
through the metric to update the weights.
Well here, none of that happens because
we don't actually have a target vector.
There is no error to backpropagate.
And also there is no lateral connections
between your output nodes.
It's important to just remember that, as you can see
we didn't actually need any connection between the nodes
the only thing that happens between the nodes is that
when you pull on one node, the other ones get pulled
the close ones get pulled, but that is through the radius
and the area that we outlined in yellow
that allows us, facilitates this whole process.
When we say that there's no connections
no lateral connections between the output nodes means that
there's no actual neural network type of connections
there's no activation functions between them and so on.
And what is important to mention is
because sometimes you'll see images
where the nodes are connected in the output
there's a grid behind the nodes.
The reason for that is they're just showing
that these are indeed nodes on a SOM
these are the output nodes, and they might just be
nicely neatly organized into a map
but that's pretty much it, there is no actual formulas
or equations going on between those nodes.
That's also important to remember.
So there we go, that's how self-organizing maps learn.
And if you'd like to study this a bit more
with some soft introduction into mathematics
the mathematics behind self-organizing maps
as you can see is very straightforward, it's very simple.
There's a couple of additional things
about how the radius changes and how the weights are updated
based on how close on the proximity
to your best-matching unit, but generally
the mathematics is, I would say, the simplest out of all
of the neural networks that we're discussing in this course.
So if you'd like to study the math a little bit
and also get some introduction to programming SOMs
a great blog, or several blogs actually, on this topic
are available at ai-junkie dot com
so here's a link by Mat Buckland, not sure about the year
if it's 2004 or not, and the post is called
"Kohonen's Self Organizing Feature Maps"
Great read, and you will get a very gentle introduction
into self-organizing maps from there.
So hopefully you enjoyed today's tutorial
and I look forward to seeing you next time.
Until then, enjoy deep learning.